---
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Java Intro

Let's discover **The Basics of Java**.

## Getting Started

Get started by **learning what is Java?**.

## What is Java?
Java is a high-level, object-oriented programming language developed by Sun Microsystem(now owned by Oracle). It was designed to be platform-independent and follows the "write once, run anywhere" principle. Java achieves this through its bytecode execution model, where compiled Java code (bytecode) runs on any device with a Java Virtual Machine (JVM).


## What can you build with Java?
Java is versatile and used in a wide range of applications, including:

* Enterprise-level applications (e.g., banking systems, ERP software)
* Web applications (using frameworks like Spring, Hibernate)
* Mobile applications (Android development)
* Scientific applications
* Embedded systems
* Desktop GUI applications (using Swing, JavaFX)
* Games (using libraries like LibGDX)
## Java Usages
Java is extensively used across industries and domains due to its robustness, scalability, and platform independence. Some common uses include:

* Building backend services for web applications
* Developing Android apps
* Implementing server-side applications in large enterprises
* Creating desktop applications with rich user interfaces
* Powering big data technologies like Apache Hadoop and Apache Kafka
## Compilled vs Interpreted Languages
Compiled vs Interpreted Languages
Java is often categorized as a compiled language that uses an intermediate representation (bytecode) that is executed on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).<br></br> This bytecode is generated by the Java compiler from the source code and can be executed on any platform with a JVM installed, making Java platform-independent. While Java is primarily compiled into bytecode, the JVM can also provide just-in-time (JIT) compilation for performance optimization during runtime, blurring the line between strictly compiled and strictly interpreted languages.



